Pembrolizumab versus docetaxel for previously treated, PD-L1-positive, advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (KEYNOTE-010): a randomised controlled trial

Summary
Background
Despite recent advances in the treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer, there remains a need for effective treatments for progressive disease. We assessed the efficacy of pembrolizumab for patients with previously treated, PD-L1-positive, advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

Methods
We did this randomised, open-label, phase 2/3 study at 202 academic medical centres in 24 countries. Patients with previously treated non-small-cell lung cancer with PD-L1 expression on at least 1% of tumour cells were randomly assigned (1:1:1) in blocks of six per stratum with an interactive voice-response system to receive pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg, pembrolizumab 10 mg/kg, or docetaxel 75 mg/m² every 3 weeks. The primary endpoints were overall survival and progression-free survival both in the total population and in patients with PD-L1 expression on at least 50% of tumour cells. We used a threshold for significance of p<0·00825 (one-sided) for the analysis of overall survival and a threshold of p<0·001 for progression-free survival. This trial is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01905657.

Introduction
Although treatment for non-small-cell lung cancer has improved in recent years with the development of targeted drugs for patients with amenable mutations,1–5only a small proportion of patients have these mutations, and most tumours become resistant to targeted treatment.6 Immunotherapy is a new paradigm for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer, and targeting the PD-1 pathway is a promising therapeutic option.7–11The PD-1 receptor is an immune checkpoint inhibitor expressed on activated B and T cells that normally down-modulates excessive immune responses.12,13 Binding of PD-1 to its ligands (PD-L1 and PD-L2) on tumour cells suppresses T cells through a negative feedback loop, leading to evasion of the immune response.14–17Pembrolizumab (MK-3475) is a highly selective, humanised, IgG4 monoclonal antibody against PD-1. Pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg given once every 3 weeks was granted accelerated approval in the USA for the treatment of patients with metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer whose tumours express PD-L1 (as determined by test approved by the US Food and Drug Administration) with disease progression during or after platinum-containing chemotherapy. This approval was based on data from 550 patients with non-small-cell lung cancer enrolled in the large, multicohort, phase 1b KEYNOTE-001 study.9,18In KEYNOTE-001, a PD-L1 tumour proportion score of 50% or greater, defi ned as PD-L1 expression on at least 50% of tumour cells (appendix p 5), was associated with better outcomes.9

We present results of KEYNOTE-010, the first randomised comparison of pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg or 10 mg/kg every 3 weeks versus standard-of-care treatment for PD-L1-positive non-small-cell lung cancer that progressed after at least platinum-based chemotherapy. This study is the fi rst active-control trial that enrolled patients on the basis of prospective assessment of tumour PD-L1 expression based on the association between higher PD-L1 expression and greater clinical benefi t from pembrolizumab.
