Mutational landscape determines sensitivity to PD-1 blockade in non–small cell lung cancer

Abstract

Immune checkpoint inhibitors, which unleash a patient’s own T cells to kill tumors, are revolutionizing cancer treatment. To unravel the genomic determinants of response to this therapy, we used whole-exome sequencing of non–small cell lung cancers treated with pembrolizumab, an antibody targeting programmed cell death-1 (PD-1). In two independent cohorts, higher nonsynonymous mutation burden in tumors was associated with improved objective response, durable clinical benefit, and progression-free survival. Efficacy also correlated with the molecular smoking signature, higher neoantigen burden, and DNA repair pathway mutations; each factor was also associated with mutation burden. In one responder, neoantigen-specific CD8+ T cell responses paralleled tumor regression, suggesting that anti–PD-1 therapy enhances neoantigen-specific T cell reactivity. Our results suggest that the genomic landscape of lung cancers shapes response to anti–PD-1 therapy.

Today, more than a century since the initial observation that the immune system can reject human cancers (1), immune checkpoint inhibitors are demonstrating that adaptive immunity can be harnessed for the treatment of cancer (2–7). In advanced non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), therapies with an antibody targeting programmed cell death-1 (anti–PD-1) demonstrated response rates of 17 to 21%, with some responses being remarkably durable (3, 8).

Understanding the molecular determinants of response to immunotherapies such as anti–PD-1 therapy is one of the critical challenges in oncology. Among the best responses have been in melanomas and NSCLCs, cancers largely caused by chronic exposure to mutagens [ultraviolet light (9) and carcinogens in cigarette smoke (10), respectively]. However, there is a large variability in mutation burden within tumor types, ranging from 10s to 1000s of mutations (11–13). This range is particularly broad in NSCLCs because tumors in never-smokers generally have few somatic mutations compared with tumors in smokers (14). We hypothesized that the mutational landscape of NSCLCs may influence response to anti–PD-1 therapy. To examine this hypothesis, we sequenced the exomes of NSCLCs from two independent cohorts of patients treated with pembrolizumab, a humanized immunoglobulin G (IgG) 4-kappa isotype antibody to PD-1 (n = 16 and n = 18, respectively), and their matched normal DNA (fig. S1 and table S1) (15).

Overall, tumor DNA sequencing generated mean target coverage of 164x, and a mean of 94.5% of the target sequence was covered to a depth of at least 10x; coverage and depth were similar between cohorts, as well as between those with or without clinical benefit (fig. S2). We identified a median of 200 nonsynonymous mutations per sample (range 11 to 1192). The median number of exonic mutations per sample was 327 (range 45 to 1732). The quantity and range of mutations were similar to published series of NSCLCs (16, 17) (fig. S3). The transition/transversion ratio (Ti/Tv) was 0.74 (fig. S4), also similar to previously described NSCLCs (16–18). To ensure accuracy of our sequencing data, targeted resequencing with an orthogonal method (Ampliseq) was performed using 376 randomly selected variants, and mutations were confirmed in 357 of those variants (95%).

Higher somatic nonsynonymous mutation burden was associated with clinical efficacy of pembrolizumab. In the discovery cohort (n = 16), the median number of nonsynonymous mutations was 302 in patients with durable clinical benefit (DCB) (partial or stable response lasting >6 months) versus 148 with no durable benefit (NDB) (Mann-Whitney P = 0.02) (Fig. 1A). Seventy-three percent of patients with high nonsynonymous burden (defined as above the median burden of the cohort, 209) experienced DCB, compared with 13% of those with low mutation burden (below median) (Fisher’s exact P = 0.04). Both confirmed objective response rate (ORR) and progression-free survival (PFS) were higher in patients with high nonsynonymous burden [ORR 63% versus 0%, Fisher’s exact P = 0.03; median PFS 14.5 versus 3.7 months, log-rank P = 0.01; hazard ratio (HR) 0.19, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.05 to 0.70] (Fig. 1B and table S2).
