Reduced Lung-Cancer Mortality with Low-Dose Computed Tomographic Screening

Background

The aggressive and heterogeneous nature of lung cancer has thwarted efforts to reduce mortality from this cancer through the use of screening. The advent of low-dose helical computed tomography (CT) altered the landscape of lung-cancer screen-ing, with studies indicating that low-dose CT detects many tumors at early stages. The National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) was conducted to determine whether screening with low-dose CT could reduce mortality from lung cancer.

Methods

From August 2002 through April 2004, we enrolled 53,454 persons at high risk for lung cancer at 33 U.S. medical centers. Participants were randomly assigned to un-dergo three annual screenings with either low-dose CT (26,722 participants) or sin-gle-view posteroanterior chest radiography (26,732). Data were collected on cases of lung cancer and deaths from lung cancer that occurred through December 31, 2009.


Lung cancer is an aggressive and het-erogeneous disease.1,2 Advances in surgical, radiotherapeutic, and chemotherapeutic ap-proaches have been made, but the long-term sur-vival rate remains low.3 After the Surgeon Gen-eral’s 1964 report on smoking and health, mortality from lung cancer among men peaked and then fell; among women, the peak occurred later and a slight decline has occurred more recently.4 Even though the rate of heavy smoking continues to decline in the United States,5 94 million current or former smokers remain at elevated risk for the disease,6 and lung cancer remains the leading cause of death from cancer in this country.3 The prevalence of smoking is substantially higher in developing countries than in the United States, and the worldwide burden of lung cancer is pro-jected to rise considerably during the coming years.7Although effective mass screening of high-risk groups could potentially be of benefit, random-ized trials of screening with the use of chest ra-diography with or without cytologic analysis of sputum specimens have shown no reduction in lung-cancer  mortality.8  Molecular  markers  in blood, sputum, and bronchial brushings have been studied but are currently unsuitable for clinical application.8 Advances in multidetector computed tomography (CT), however, have made high-res-olution volumetric imaging possible in a single breath hold at acceptable levels of radiation expo-sure,9 allowing its use for certain lung-specific applications. Several observational studies have shown that low-dose helical CT of the lung de-tects more nodules and lung cancers, including early-stage cancers, than does chest radiography.8Therefore, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) funded the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST), a randomized trial, to determine whether screen-ing with low-dose CT, as compared with chest radiography, would reduce mortality from lung cancer among high-risk persons. The NLST was initiated in 2002.10 In October 2010, the available data showed that there was a significant reduc-tion with low-dose CT screening in the rates of both death from lung cancer and death from any cause. We report here the findings of the NLST, including the performance characteristics of the screening techniques, the approaches used for and the results of diagnostic evaluation of positive screening results, the characteristics of the lung-cancer cases, and mortality. A comprehensive de-scription of the design and operations of the trial, including the collection of the data and the ac-quisition variables of the screening techniques, has been published previously.


