Big Data Analytics in Heart Attack Prediction

Abstract

Introduction: Acute myocardial infarction (heart attack) is one of the deadliest diseases patients face. The key tocardiovascular disease management is to evaluate large scores of datasets, compare and mine for information thatcan be used to predict, prevent, manage and treat chronic diseases such as heart attacks. Big Data analytics,known in the corporate world for its valuable use in controlling, contrasting and managing large datasets can beapplied with much success to the prediction, prevention, management and treatment of cardiovascular disease.Data mining, visualization and Hadoop are technologies or tools of big data in mining the voluminous datasets forinformation.


Introduction

Acute  Myocardial  infarction  (AMI),  commonly  referred  to  as  aheart attack, is among one of the deadliest of cardiovascular diseases.AMI  happens  as  circulation  or  blood flow  to  heart  muscle  isinterrupted,  causing  the  heart  muscle  to  damage  or  die  (becomenecrotic) [1]. The primary reason for most heart attacks is a blockagewhich causes blood flow to one of the coronary arteries, vital channelsthrough which blood travels to the heart muscle, to become reduced orobstructed.  When  blood flow  is  obstructed  or  reduced,  the  heartmuscle is rapidly deprived of red blood cells which carry the necessaryoxygen essential for sustaining life and consciousness in the humanbody. It takes as few as six to eight minutes without oxygen to cause theheart muscle to arrest, leading to the individual’s death [2]. The causeof most heart attacks is plaque, a hard substance which builds up overtime  in  the  coronary  arteries.  Plaque,  a  substance  made  up  ofnumerous cells and cholesterol (fat), draws platelets, which increaseover time, causing a blockage large enough to diminish or block bloodflow to heart muscle. Some individuals have a build-up of plaque in thearteries  over  many  years  and  this  is  known  as  atherosclerosis.Examining  the  cause  and  etiology  of  atherosclerosis,  it  can  bedescribed as a chronic inflammation. And when examining AMI, italso  could  be  described  as  acute inflammation.  White  blood  cellproduction in the bone marrow is increased due to signaling via thesympathetic nervous system after the AMI as well as in the spleen. Thisincrease in white blood cell production migrate to the heart and vesselwall and can be recruited into other atherosclerotic plaques, causingmore inflammation  and  likely  subsequent  ischemic  events  such  asreinfarction or stroke [3].There are generally two phases of wound healing when it comes tomonocytes and macrophages. Initially there is an early inflammatoryphase and afterwards, a reparative phase begins. However, both phasesare necessary for proper wound healing; but if either of these phases isstalled or if the inflammation continues too long, resolution of theAlexander and Wang, J Nurs Care 2017, 6:2DOI: 10.4172/2167-1168.1000393Research ArticleOpen AccessJ Nurs Care, an open access journalISSN:2167-1168Volume 6 • Issue 2 • 1000393JournalofNursing&CareISSN: 2167-1168Journal of Nursing & Care
inflammation never happens and it leads to heart failure [3]. On theother hand, a more unusual type of heart attack strikes when there isan acute spasm or constriction of one of the coronary arteries. Thespasm  then  cuts off  blood flow  to  the  heart  causing  oxygendeprivation. These spasms can appear in coronary arteries without anysigns  of  atherosclerosis.  As  far  as  symptoms,  men  are significantlymore  likely  to  experience  chest  pain  than  women.  Furthermore,women are far more likely to experience a heart attack if their painlasts more than one hour, while men are more like to experience paindurations of less than one hour when having a heart attack [2]. AMIoccurs within the entire physiological system; it does not just happento the heart, but changes happen everywhere, including remote organssuch as the spleen and bone marrow [3].The  old  way  of  handling  data  included  small  and  expensivemethods. Input data from clinical trials were too small and too costly;data was limited so the modelling effort was small. However, in today’smarket, the electronic health record (EHR) has revolutionized datamanagement. Data has become cheaper, larger, and there is a broaderpatient  population  to  be  included.  Data  has  become  noisy,heterogeneous,  diverse  in  scale  and  longitudinal  in  the  EHR.  Inaddition,  Medicare  now  penalizes  hospitals  with  high  rates  ofreadmissions  amid  patients  with  Heart  failure,  Heart  attack,  andPneumonia [4]. Care plans and outcomes-based discharge measureshave been established by Medicare so that hospitals must conform toMedicare admission and discharge regulations for these diseases forreimbursement. Outcomes measures have become the primary modeof  evaluating  patients  for  discharge  and  reimbursement  since  theestablishment of the Health Insurance Portability and AccountabilityAct  of  1996.  Some  examples  of different  outcome  in  health  careinclude:  binary  outcomes  (death  or  adverse  events),  continuousoutcomes (length of stay or visual analogue score), ordinal outcomes(quality  of  life,  grade  of  tumor,  number  of  heart  attacks),  survivaloutcomes (cancer survival or clinical trials) [4]. Big data, a conceptnow several years old, is becoming the primary method to harness dataas more and more health care organizations discover opportunities tobetter understand and predict customer behaviors and interests. Bigdata is the data that exceeds the processing capacity of conventionaldatabase systems. The data is too big, moves too fast, or doesn’t fit thestrictures  of  conventional  database  architectures  [5].  Big  datacharacteristics can be described by “6Vs”. They are: Volume, Velocity,Variety, Value, Variability and Veracity [5-14].Volume: It means data size such as terabytes (TB: approximately1012 bytes), petabytes (PB: approximately 1015 bytes) and zettabytes(ZB: approximately 21 bytes), etc.Velocity: Data is generated at a high speed.Variety: Data can be structured, semi-structured, or unstructured.Value: It refers to the value that the data adds to creating knowledge.Variability: It refers to data changes during processing and lifecycle.Veracity: It includes two aspects: data consistency (or certainty) anddata trustworthiness.Big data fosters newer opportunities to predict and/or more rapidlyrespond to critical clinical events, generating better health outcomesand  more efficient  cost  management.  Oracle,  an  internationaltechnology firm, proposes that big data often has low value density ifdata is received in its original form. Intelligent electronic devices - usedby some individuals while both at home and while traveling abouttheir  day  -  now  capture  and  transmit  data  for  analysis  in  themanagement  of  chronic  diseases  and  conditions  providing  morefrequent data about the heart, the breathing process, blood sugar orblood pressure - as the patient goes about daily life - and significantlyincreases a provider’s ability to make appropriate clinical decisions. Acardiologist can receive data daily about each ambulatory - roughlyone hundred times more often than possible with quarterly office visits-  thereby  occasionally  giving  the  provider  an  early  warning  ofproblems, which could prevent a heart attack. Data compiled by thesemedical devices is quite frequently voluminous and rapidly increasing;this  necessitates  intensive  and  complex  analysis  to  both  augmentclinical  decisions  and  guide  research  on  improved  practices,  thusimproving outcomes [15].But big data is not only about size, there is also the insight it derivesfrom  complex,  noisy,  heterogeneous,  longitudinal,  and  voluminousdata.  Challenges,  however,  include  capturing,  storing,  searching,sharing  and  analyzing.  And  social  communication  in  varied  digitalforms is on the increase [16]. Already established as a novel field, datamining is now a primary method for discovering knowledge in buriedpatterns  among  the  big  datasets.  In  the  health  care  industry,  thisuncharted knowledge can be utilized in different application domains,for  example  heart  attack  prediction.  Data  mining  techniques  andmachine  learning  can  be  used  to  develop  new software  to  assistproviders and others in the health care industry to make decisionsabout heart attacks in the early stages [17,18]. Big Data is created by agrowing  plurality  of  resources,  including  Internet  clicks,  mobiletransactions, user-generated content, and social media, and currently,genomics  data,  as  well  as  purposefully  generated  content  throughsensor networks or corporate transactions. Currently, the most vitaladvances  include  the  use  of  genomic  data  in  drug  discovery,  thesharing  of  clinical-trial  data,  the  use  of  EHRs,  and  the  growingavailability of data from mHealth applications such as telemedicine,patient registries, and social media [19]. Medication data vary in EHRsystems and can be in both structured and unstructured formats. Theavailability and completeness of medication data vary while inpatientmedication data may be complete, but outpatient medication data maynot be. Prescription records may be incomplete as data is usually onlystored as prescriptions but we cannot be sure whether patients filledthose prescriptions. Clinical notes also hold rich and various sources ofinformation, most of which is unstructured [16]. The new generationof information about the efficacy of treatments and the prediction ofoutcomes are the most fundamental applications of big health caredata.  Big  Data  varies  from  traditional  decision  support  tools  as  itfosters  collection  and  analysis  of  real-time  patient  data  [19].  It  isextremely  vital  to  patient  care  and  reducing  both  mortality  andmorbidity associated with heart attacks that providers can utilize bigdata  applications  to  improve  or  establish  a  heart  attack  predictionprogram. Predicting heart attacks will not only save numerous lives butwill assist providers in establishing personalized medicine, one of themany applications of big data in health care currently available.


