Patient–physician gender concordance and increased mortality among female heart attack patients

We examine patient gender disparities in survival rates followingacute myocardial infarctions (i.e., heart attacks) based on thegender of the treating physician. Using a census of heart attackpatients admitted to Florida hospitals between 1991 and 2010, wefind higher mortality among female patients who are treated bymale physicians. Male patients and female patients experiencesimilar outcomes when treated by female physicians, suggestingthat unique challenges arise when male physicians treat femalepatients. We further find that male physicians with more exposureto female patients and female physicians have more successtreating female patients.

Asignificant number of life’s outcomes are not determinedthrough self-advocacy. Instead, they result, at least in part,from people who advocate for, and act on, a person’s behalf.Furthermore, people do not always have their choice of advo-cate, and advocates may differ from those they advocate for interms of values, beliefs, background, race, and even gender.However, distressingly, in the absence of gender concordancebetween advocates and those they advocate for—particularly ininstances where men are advocating for women—women havebeen found to fare worse than their male counterparts, facingdisadvantages in terms of pay equality (1), ascension to leader-ship positions (2), educational outcomes (3), legal dispute reso-lution (4), and even medical treatment (5). In the medicalsetting, research suggests that gender discordance may yieldlower rapport and patient satisfaction (6), reduced adherence topreventative care protocols (7), and weaker patient–physiciancommunication (8).These concerns regarding the deleterious effects of genderdiscordance are becoming increasingly salient in the presence oftwo emerging literatures: a growing body of medical researchsuggesting that women are less likely to survive traumatic healthepisodes like acute myocardial infarctions (AMIs) and researchexamining performance heterogeneity across male and femalephysicians. To date, researchers have offered a number of ex-planations for the gender disparity in AMI survival: Femalepatients may have an increased propensity to delay seekingtreatment (9), may present symptoms that differ from men (5, 10,11), and may be more challenging to diagnose and treat (12). Atthe same time, researchers have observed that female physiciansoutperform their male counterparts across a variety of conditions(in terms of mortality and readmission) once potential confounds(e.g., risk profiles, age, and race) are accounted for (13).In this work, we posit that gender discordance between phy-sician and patient helps to explain why female patients are lesslikely to survive AMIs. A deep body of social science researchexplains why individuals often possess in-group biases (14) andhave difficulty communicating effectively with members of socialgroups who possess different ascriptive characteristics than theirown (15). Furthermore, extant work in physician–patient com-munication (8, 16) and patient satisfaction (6) shows that theseissues are salient in the medical setting. We posit that thesechallenges exacerbate the difficulty of diagnosing and treatingAMIs, such that physician–patient gender concordance contrib-utes to better patient outcomes. We further argue that thebenefits of gender concordance will be strongest for female pa-tients due to the difficulty of diagnosing and treating AMIs infemale patients. We find empirical support for these ideas,documenting that gender concordance between the patient andphysician influences measurable, substantive outcomes like pa-tient survival and length of stay during an AMI. Furthermore,this relationship is much stronger for female patients. Resultssuggest that medical providers may need to account for thepossible challenges physicians (particularly male physicians) facewhen treating AMI patients of the opposite gender.


