Real-time Heart Attack Mobile Detection Service (RHAMDS): An IoT Use Case forSoftware Defined Networks

Abstract

Continuous  growing  interest  in  IoT  applicationsparticularly   for   a   smart   city   setting   has   attracted   manyresearchers.  E-health  applications  in  IoT  networks  are  thenewest area of interest in this research field. On the other hand,networking  and  communications  fields  are  witnessing  a  revo-lution  through  the  new  concepts  of  Mobile  Edge  Computing(MEC)  characterised  by  latency  sensitivity  and  geographicalawareness.  Moreover,  the  Software  Defined  Network  (SDN)  isan  innovative  network  paradigm  that  allows  programming  ofthe network through the separation of the data plane and thecontrol plane and provides global intelligence for the network.We  marry  this  technologies  to  propose  a  novel  IoT  e-healthservice;   Real-time   Heart   Attack   Mobile   Detection   Service(RHAMDS)  through  voice  control  and  gesture  control  usingsmart  watches.  RHAMDS  aims  to  improve  response  time  ofemergency aid for heart attack patients, in vehicular networksin  particular,  and  to  prevent  the  possible  resulting  vehiclecollisions.  In  this  paper,  we  present  the  proposed  RHAMDS’snetwork architecture, workflow, and model variations.


INTRODUCTION

Rapid technological development has naturally evolved toa hunger for further innovation, particularly with relation toIoT applications in smart cities for they map the near future[1], [2]. Researching e-health IoT services is one of the mainfocuses for this development as it contributes to the defini-tion  of  the  next  generation  of  such  impactful  applications[3]. Specifically, deployment and employment of ubiquitouse-health  applications  is  extensively  researched  due  to  themany  factoring  networking  parameters  [4].  As  a  matter  offact,  many  opportunities  and  challenges  of  e-health  IoTservices development remain to be tackled [5]. Opportunitiespertaining to the incorporation of sensors within the recentlyreleased popular smart watches for e-health IoT services aremain contributions of this paper. Smart watches are equippedwith  various  sensors  such  as  gyroscopes,  accelerometers,Global  Positioning  System  (GPS),  and  heart  rate  monitors.The  latter  three  sensors  are  of  interest  with  relation  to  thee-health IoT service that this paper proposes.Moreover, industrial interest in wide-scale IoT applicationand  service  development  for  intelligent  transportation  sys-tems is escalating with large scale projects already in action[6]. This is based on the hypothesis that a high percentageof  vehicles  will  be  smart,  electric,  and  fit  with  sensorsemploying the potential of direct real-time communication toother nodes in the resulting network. Reliable surveillance,road  traffic  safety  and  monitoring,  and  optimised  socialconnectivity are just a few of the advantageous scenarios tobe realised. For an organisation of such networks, VehicularAdhoc Network (VANET) is the required framework.VANET is the framework where smart cars are modelledas  mobile  nodes  in  a  vehicular  network  [7].  In  VANETs,not   only   do   vehicles   communicate   with   each   other   inVehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) communication, but also vehiclescommunicate with Road Side Units (RSU) in a Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) communication mode. While this futur-istic approach provides the ability of developing various userfriendly vehicular services, its limitations include Quality ofService (QoS), connectivity and resource management, andlatency insensitivity  due to  unreliable  network connectivityand  high  vehicular  mobility  [8].  Moreover,  deployment  ofsuch services is faced with implementation performance ob-stacles such as unbalanced traffic flow among the multipathVANET  topology  and  the  inefficient  utilisation  of  networkinfrastructure [6].On  the  other  hand,  Mobile  Edge  Computing  (MEC)  isan innovative architecture that utilises cloud computing andmobile  networking  advances  for  low  latency  support  ofapplications [9]. Also, Software Defined Network (SDN) isan emerging innovative paradigm for dynamic programmingof  the  network  that  promises  increased  network  flexibilityand significant cost reduction. That is SDN enables networkdevices  to  be  independent  of  their  physical  structure,  butrather be programmed as per the needs of the current servicedeployed  [10].  As  such,  a  SDN-powered  MEC  VANETarchitecture  is  most  suitable  for  the  proposed  e-health  IoTservice.  This  is  because  while  the  e-health  IoT  service  ismost  appropriate  for  a  VANET  architecture,  the  VANETchallenges  discussed  might  prevent  a  reliable  exploitationof  it.  SDN  and  MEC  provide  the  required  computationand  technological  infrastructure  to  model  a  robust,  delay-sensitive  and  resource-managed  VANET  architecture  withan  efficient  network  infrastructure  utilisation  and  a  near balanced traffic flow suitable for the e-health IoT service.In this paper, we propose a Real-time Heart Attack MobileDetection Service (RHAMDS) that utilises IoT devices andnetwork  for  vehicle  collision  prevention  and  improvementof  emergency  response  time.  RHAMDS,  the  e-health  IoTservice, is a novel IoT use case for SDN-powered MEC thatemploys  these  technologies  in  a  VANET  architecture  fora  reliable  performance.  While  RHAMDS  aims  to  preventvehicle  collision  through  the  detection  of  heart  attacks,it  may  also  be  expanded  for  detection  of  other  criticalhealth  conditions  to  build  a  comprehensive  e-health  IoTplatform  that  promises  to  revolutionise  road  safety  andtraffic  engineering.  Consequently,  we  discuss  the  model,architecture,  and  work-flow  of  the  proposed  SDN  enablede-health  IoT  service  and  present  the  SDN-powered  MECVANET architecture that RHAMDS uses.The  remainder  of  the  paper  is  structured  as  follows:  inSection  II,  we  briefly  discuss  background  information  ofthe  architectures  upon  which  RHAMDS  is  based  on.  InSection III, we present RHAMDS’s network architecture andidentify  its  main  components.  In  Section  IV,  we  proposethe  work-flow,  models,  and  variations  of  RHAMDS  and  inSection V, we discuss our results. Finally, in Section VI, weconclude and identify future research plans.
