Polysaccharides from Chinese herbal medicine for anti-diabetesrecent advances

abstract

Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a chronic disease occurring when the body no longer produces adequate insulin orwhen it cannot use the produced insulin effectively. In recent years, more and more studies have revealed thatChinese materia medica polysaccharides are the key bioactive components of Chinese herbal medicine andhave significant anti-diabetic effects with almost no side effects. In this review, we summarize 10 kinds of poly-saccharides from Chinese herbal medicine which have effective anti-diabetes activities and the mechanism since2014 to now. And it is hoped that this will provide an enlightenment for our researchers to design, research anddevelopment of polysaccharides.

Introduction

Diabetes mellitus (DM), also known as Xiaoke disease in traditional Chi-nese medicine (TCM), is a chronic diseaseoccurringwhenthebodynolon-ger produces adequate insulin or when it cannot use the produced insulineffectively [1]. The International Diabetes Federation has published theeighth edition of the Global Diabetes Map. The results showed that theglobal number of adult diabetic patients (20–79yearsold)hasreached415 million, which was 151 million in 2000 to nearly 425 million in 2017.It is estimated that by 2045, diabetes patients may reach 629 million [2].The major clinical symptoms of DM are polydipsia, polyuria, polydipsia,emaciation, fatigue, weakness, and obesity. In severe cases, complicationsof diabetes such as renal failure, amputation, cardiovascular diseases and vi-sion loss daily activities including eating and dressing are also affected [3].DM is mainly divided into two types: the type 1 DM (T1DM), is an autoim-mune disease with insulin deficiency, and the type 2 DM (T2DM), which ismainly due to ineffective insulin action [4]. The pathological features of pa-tients with DM are impaired insulin secretion or impaired biological func-tion, or both, which causes elevated blood sugar level. However, thepathogenic factors that are present in the majority of DM patients havenot been confirmed. Most of the current viewpoints consider that the path-ogenesis of T2DM is the feedback ofβcells to glucose homeostasis. Andboth genes and environment are important determinants of insulin resis-tance andβ-cell dysfunction. Although we have a better understanding ofthe importance of insulin resistance and pancreaticβ-cell dysfunction inthe pathogenesis of T2DM and understand that they are associated withthe high-risk state of illness, there is a clear heterogeneity in the progressionof the disease and may include other pathogenic factors may be included,while researchers are currently unclear about the molecular mechanismsinvolved in diabetes [3].The drugs used to treat diabetes mainly include biguanides, sulfonyl-ureas, glinides, a glucosidase inhibitors, thiazolidinediones, and insulinanalogues. Currently, some new drugs have emerged, such as Peptidylpeptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitor, glucagon-like peptide1 (GLP⁃1) receptoragonist, sodium glucosinolate co-transporter 2 (SGLT-2) inhibitor, andnovel insulin preparation [5]. Among them glucagon receptor antago-nists (e.g., PF-06291874) are a class of new drugs that have good thera-peutic potential and are still in long-term trial evaluation. On the onehand, those drugs are too expensive to meet the huge demand of dia-betic patients, thus limiting their wide application in clinical practice.Stem cell research can increase the number ofβcells, delay the progres-sion of T2DM, but still require additional hypoglycemic therapy [6]. Re-searchers are increasingly devoting themselves to the development ofmore safe and economical hypoglycemic drugs.Polysaccharides are polymeric carbohydrate molecules composed oflong chains of monosaccharide units bound together by glycosidic link-ages, and on hydrolysis given the constituent monosaccharides or oligo-saccharides. They range in structure from linear to highly branch.Polysaccharides have a general formula of Cx(H2O)ywhere x is usuallya large number between 200 and 2500. Scientists have found that poly-saccharides and glycoconjugates are not only used as energy resourcesand constituent materials in living organisms, but also more impor-tantly, they exist in all cell membrane structures and participate show-ing a serious physiological activity. The studies have shown thatpolysaccharides have immunomodulatory, antitumor, antioxidant andhypoglycemic effects. Therefore, Chinese materia medica polysaccha-rides, which are natural macromolecules, play an important role in lifescience and drug research. In recent years, more and more studieshave revealed that Chinese materia medica polysaccharides are thekey bioactive components of Chinese herbal medicine and have signifi-cant anti-diabetic effects with almost no side effects or adverse drug re-action [1]. In general, the mechanisms of action by which Chinesemateria medica polysaccharides exert their anti-diabetic effects andare mainly divided into four categories: a. polysaccharides targetingβ-cell dysfunction; b. polysaccharides inhibitingα‑amylase andα‑glucosidase; c. polysaccharides targeting insulin enhancement; d.polysaccharides targeting glucose metabolism in non-insulin-depen-dent pathways. Almost every Chinese materia medica polysaccharideshave one or more hypoglycaemic mechanisms, but the exact molecularmechanisms are different. Consumption of these bioactive moleculestogether in the form of natural product is beneficial and safe. This is be-cause of the fact that the cofactors or other biomolecules negate the ad-verse effects of each other and therefore considered to be safe [7]. Ourreview focuses on the advancements in the anti-diabetic efficacy of var-ious natural polysaccharides since 2014 to now. And it is hoped that itwill provide inspirations for our researchers to design, research and de-velop polysaccharides.

