How tofigure out the surname of a Chinese author

Confusion persists as to how to figure out which of the Chinese
author's name is his or her surname, although I have made numerous
attempts in suggesting possible solutions to this nasty problem in the
past [1–10]. In China, the customary way of writing one's name is
surname first followed by the given name, as in the telephone directory.
This is just opposite to a Western name, in which the first name comes
first and the last name last. The reason behind this tradition is that, in
Chinese culture, emphasis is placed on the revering the ancestors, and
part of this process means that people honor their ancestors by placing
the family names ahead of the given names [11]. Thus the name of the
founding father of the People's Republic of China is Mao Tse Tung (now
spelledMao Zedong). I have often seen articles in American newspapers,
magazines or journals in which Mao would be addressed as Mr. Tung or
Mr. Zedong, thus creating a great deal of confusion.
Such a problem does not exist in the rest of the world, because the
first name always comes first and the last name always comes last. For
instance, there is a librarian in my university by the name of George Paul.
Although George and Paul are both common first names, nobody ever
has problems in addressing him, either as George or Mr. Paul. However,
if he goes to China, the Chinese would have a hard time in deciding
whether to call him Mr. George or Mr. Paul.
Because one of every four persons on the planet is a Chinese, the
matter of knowing the surname of a Chinese person becomes
extremely important. One suggestion I made previously was to include
the author's name in Chinese [8]. However, this may not be of too much
help, unless you know Chinese or are a Chinese. Another suggestion I
made was for the journal editor and/or publisher to refuse considering
publication of any article by authors from China, unless they spell their
names the Western way, that is, first name first and last name last [8].
Unfortunately, unless and until this drastic measure is adopted by all
the journal editors, such a policy will not be feasible.
Several years ago, someone suggested using initials of Chinese given
names to resolve the problem. What a barbarous practice! There is no way
to initialize a Chinese character; this is simply a western alphabetic
practice [12]. Who would ever know who Z.-D. Mao (for Mao Zedong ) or
X.-P. Deng (for Deng Xiaoping) is? This problem exists where westernized
Chinese authors have become used to initials and do not give their full
names. We should never initialize a Chinese full name just to follow the
Western style [10]. Moreover, to put a hyphen between initials is alien to
the Chinese pinyin system. Finally, from early April 2010, China’s national
broadcasting CCTV (China Central Television) banned the use of borrowed
English abbreviations such as NBA, GDP, WTO and CPI in all its programs
[13]. The move was launched in line with a government directive after
several national legislators and political advisors called for the preservation of the Chinese language’s purity [13].
Recently, I discovered a possible solution from reading a Chinese
medical journal, entitled Chinese Journal of Integrative Medicine, in which
the authors' surnames are spelled all in capitals and the first and middle
names hyphenated (Fig. 1). Unfortunately, this is not a perfect solution
either, because the publisher of this journal did not capitalize the
surname of the author of the second article in the same issue. Tang, the
author of the second article in the issue, is from Hong Kong, which used
to be a British colony until 1997. So, residents of Hong Kong still follow
the Western style of putting their surnames last. Thus, Tang followed the
Western style of writing his name Jin-Ling Tang (Fig. 1). Therefore,
unless one is familiar with such an idiosyncrasy, one may still be
confused as to which name of a Chinese author is the surname.
