Developing a Chinese version of an
Author Recognition Test for college
students in Taiwan

This study set out to develop a Chinese Author Recognition Test (CART) that might be
used as a measure of objective print exposure for college students in Taiwan. We found
that there is a linkage between print exposure and general reading achievement for
college students. We also found that, among self-reported reading habits, comparative
reading habits and CART, primary print knowledge scores within the CART family have
the strongest prediction power for both the ‘General Scholastic Ability Test-Chinese’
and the ‘Department Required Test-Chinese’ beyond the joint contributions of vocabulary size and reading comprehension. By sharing the process of developing the instrument, we shed some light for researchers from regions other than English-speaking
countries on how they might move forward in future investigations.


There is tremendous variation in literacy habits. Researchers in Western cultures have
linked such variation in college students’ print exposure to their variability in
reading-related skills, such as lexical-decision latency (Chateau & Jared, 2000), spelling
ability (Burt & Fury, 2000; Stanovich & West, 1989), vocabulary (Martin-Chang & Gould,
2008; Stanovich, West & Harrison, 1995; West & Stanovich, 1991), verbal fluency
(Stanovich & Cunningham, 1992), reading comprehension and reading rate (Martin-Chang
& Gould, 2008), and general measures of achievement in reading and reading-related
domains (e.g., the SAT reading and English subtests; Acheson, Wells & Macdonald,
2008). Because level of print exposure has been one of the key variables in individual
differences across many reading-related cognitive dimensions, developing a reliable
Chinese instrument for assessing relative levels of print exposure is the focus of this study.
Traditional research has used a self-reported measure of reading habits, which asks
college students or young adults to estimate the amount of time they spend reading.
Results of questionnaires and interviews have served to assess their variation in literacy
habits (e.g., Gallik, 1999; Guthrie, 1981; Walberg & Tsai, 1984). An alternative tool, the
Author Recognition Test (ART) for college students, was first developed by Stanovich
and West (1989) and has been widely used since its creation. The ART has consistently
proven to be an ideal proxy measure for out-of-school print exposure. The test includes
the names of both popular authors and foils, and respondents are to indicate whether or not they are familiar with the name of a particular author by putting a check mark next to
the name. According to Stanovich, Cunningham and West (1998), the advantages of the
ART over traditional methods include easy administration, low task demands, time-saving
and minimisation of the complications associated with social desirability involved in
self-reporting.
The first version of the ART for college students was developed as a measure reflecting
relative individual differences in print exposure and was not intended to measure absolute
levels of print exposure (Stanovich & West, 1989). It consisted of 50 ‘popular’ authors and
50 ‘foils’. Most of the popular authors regularly appeared on fiction and non-fiction best-seller
lists. Major categories of fiction included mystery/detective, romance/Gothic, spy/intrigue,
occult/supernatural, historical novels, Westerns, short stories and science fiction. Non-fiction
categories included sports, science, politics/current events, humour, religious, history,
biography and business/finance. Authors that appeared in the school curriculum were
avoided, as the ART was intentionally biased toward out-of-school reading experience. Foils,
that is, names taken from the editorial board of a professional journal that were unfamiliar to
all respondents in the study, were used to prevent respondents from simply checking all the
names. Scoring on the task was determined by subtracting the false-alarm rate from the hit
rate. The original version of the ART was later revised into a 25-item instrument containing
the names of 16 authors and 9 foils in West and Stanovich’s (1991) study and into an 80-item
version containing 40 authors and 40 foils in several succeeding studies (e.g., Stanovich &
Cunningham, 1992; Stanovich et al., 1995). Although the Magazine Recognition Test
(MRT) and the Newspaper Recognition Test (NRT) have been frequently utilised, the ART
has remained the most sensitive measure of print exposure, probably because the writing
styles of individual authors influence readers’ selection of reading materials and avid readers
usually have their favourite authors. Magazines and newspapers, on the other hand, represent
collections of works of many authors and therefore are of less distinctive value.
The ART was also revised or developed in several English-speaking countries other than
the United States. Chateau and Jared (2000), for example, generated a Canadian version of
the ART for college students and found that levels of print exposure were highly correlated
with the efficiency of both orthographical and phonological word recognition. Burt and
Fury (2000) also revised the 1989 (Stanovich & West, 1989) and 1992 (Stanovich &
Cunningham, 1992) versions into a test for Australian college students. Authors found that
level of print exposure served as a better predictor of spelling ability than the joint
contributions of reading comprehension and vocabulary. Later, Masterson and Hayes
(2007) developed new versions of the ART and the Title Recognition Test (TRT) for adults
in the United Kingdom. Note that, in the past, the TRT was used mainly for children rather
than adults (e.g., Allen, Cipielewski & Stanovich, 1992; Cipielewski & Stanovich, 1992;
Cunningham & Stanovich, 1990; Ecalle & Magnan, 2008; McBride-Chang & Chang,
1995). Masterson and Hayes’ initial list of authors and titles was equally distributed among
four sources: the top 100 most-loaned titles according to a library for 2002 and 2003, the
Nielscan Top 100 fiction titles purchased before September 2004, the top-ranked list at an
online bookshop, and the titles or authors that had recently been awarded prizes. These lists
were then pilot-tested, and the final lists were formed by deleting the items that were least
often correctly identified. The researchers found higher scores for the UKART than for the
UKTRT. Both measures served as good predictors for spelling ability, vocabulary and
reading rate, but only the UKART was related to comprehension.
Two recent studies might have elaborated our understanding of the ART. First, MartinChang and Gould (2008) proposed the notion of dividing the ART into two dimensions: personal reading experience from primary print knowledge (PPK) and from secondary
print knowledge (SPK). They updated the original version of the ART (Stanovich &
West, 1989) by adding 30 contemporary best-selling authors suggested by avid
readers during pilot investigations, thus resulting in a final checklist consisting of
75 widely recognised authors and 75 foils. In this version of the ART, in addition
to indicating whether or not they were familiar with the name of a particular author,
respondents were also asked to report if (1) they had heard of this author but not read
any of his or her books, (2) they had started a book by this author but not finished it,
or (3) they had read one or more of this author’s books. Although scores for the PPK
were obtained by summing the number of authors that respondents successfully
recognised and reported that ‘they had read one or more of this author’s books’
divided by the total number of real authors, scores for the SPK were calculated by
summing the number of authors that respondents successfully recognised but reported
that ‘they had heard of this author, but not read any of his or her books’ over the total
number of real authors. Foils that were incorrectly marked were ignored from both
measures of print exposure. Authors that respondents successfully recognised and
reported that ‘they had started a book by this author but not finished it’ were also
ignored. This study found that the PPK accounted for variance in all three criterion
variables (vocabulary, comprehension and reading rate) after the effects of the SPK
had been factored out.
Second, Acheson et al. (2008) measured print exposure not only with the revised
ART and MRT but also with several new self-reports on reading and writing habits:
time spent reading, time spent writing and comparative reading habits (CRH). In the
section of time spent reading, participants were asked to estimate the amount of time
they spent in a typical week reading certain types of material, for example, textbooks,
academic material, magazines, newspapers, emails, Internet material, fiction and
non-fiction. Similarly, they were asked to estimate the amount of time they spent
writing certain types of material, for example, for class, articles, personal, emails,
creative and job-related. In the CRH section, they were asked to compare their own
reading habits to those of other college students on a Likert scale consisting of five
dimensions: time spent reading, complexity of reading material, reading enjoyment,
reading speed and reading comprehension ability. This study employed hierarchical
regression and found that when the CRH was entered before the ART/MRT composite,
the unique predictability of the ART/MRT was reduced to nonsignificance. The
researchers suggested that the CRH might be better equipped to capture a broader
range of reading experiences, including Internet-based reading. In addition, although
self-estimated reading time fails to differentiate slow readers from avid readers and
is therefore relatively unreliable, the CRH appears to be a useful supplement to other
assessments of print exposure.
In summary, previous studies from English-speaking countries have used
various measures of print exposure for college students: self-reported reading
habits, self-reported CRH and objective print exposure measures such as the ART.
The relationships between print exposure, and reading-related skills or general reading
performance have been well-established, especially between the ART and the readingrelated performance. Compared with studies from Western cultures, investigations of
college students’ print exposure and its relationship with reading-related performance
in Taiwan have been limited. This paper represents one of the first efforts dedicated to
this topic.
