Foreign Language Reading Anxiety:
Chinese as a Foreign Language
in the United States

This study examined the foreign language (FL) reading anxiety level of English-speaking university
students learning Chinese as a foreign language (n ¼ 114) in the United States. Data from two anxiety
measures, a background information questionnaire, and an email interview indicated that learners of
Chinese experienced a level of FL reading anxiety similar to general FL anxiety. FL reading anxiety was
associated with course level and experience with China but not with gender. Moreover, FL reading
anxiety was found to be negatively correlated with FL reading performance among Elementary Level I
and Intermediate Level students but not among Elementary Level II students. Unfamiliar scripts,
unfamiliar topics, and worry about comprehension were identified as the major sources of FL reading
anxiety. Findings suggest that reading anxiety was a salient problem for learners of Chinese whose native
language was English.


THE VALUE OF LANGUAGE AND COGNITIVE
skills in predicting foreign language (FL) reading
skills has been confirmed (Carrell, 1991;
Schoonen, Hulstijin, & Bossers, 1998; Taillefer,
1996). However, affective factors, such as anxiety,
and their possible predictive power have seldom
been investigated in FL reading research. A
compensatory model of second language reading
proposed by Bernhardt (2005, 2011) suggests that
first language literacy and FL knowledge explain
about 50% of the variance in FL reading
performance and that the unexplained variance
might involve the interaction of individual reader
variables (e.g., affect, interest) and texts. The role
of these individual reader variables in FL reading
performance has yet to be examined (Bernhardt,
2005). While the compensatory model highlights
the importance of individual reader variables, FL
reading anxiety as an individual affective variable
is not specifically included and the variance it can
explain in FL reading performance is unknown.
Nevertheless, researchers have found that FL
reading anxiety is negatively associated with FL reading performance (Saito, Horwitz, & Garza,
1999; Sellers, 2000; Shi & Liu, 2006). For instance,
Sellers (2000) found that highly anxious Spanish
learners had lower passage content recall and
used more local reading strategies than less
anxious students. Shi and Liu (2006) showed
that students with high FL reading anxiety tended
to score lower on reading performance tests.
FL reading anxiety is a construct that is closely
related to but distinguishable from general FL
anxiety. The literature defines this general FL
anxiety as “a distinct complex of self-perceptions,
beliefs, feelings and behaviors related to classroom language learning arising from the uniqueness of the language learning process” (Horwitz,
Horwitz, & Cope, 1986, p. 128). It stems from the
overall FL learning processes and can be easily
detected by teachers as learners try to communicate in their yet-to-develop target languages
(Horwitz et al., 1986). In contrast, FL reading
anxiety is the anxiety that learners experience
during the FL reading process and thus is related
to the specific language skill of reading. FL
reading anxiety is not easily spotted by teachers as
reading does not require spontaneous interaction
in the way speaking does. Hence, general FL
anxiety has been widely researched in both
traditional classrooms and online learning environments (e.g., Coryell & Clark, 2009; Liu &
Jackson, 2008; Pichette, 2009; Tallon, 2009) and
general conclusions have been made that FL
anxiety has a negative effect on FL performance
(Horwitz et al., 1986; MacIntyre & Gardner,
1991, 1994; Yan & Horwitz, 2008; Young, 1991,
1994). FL reading anxiety, on the other hand, has
drawn researchers’ attention only recently and
many questions, such as those regarding the
predictive power of FL reading anxiety on reading
performance and the source of FL reading
anxiety, await answers (Saito et al., 1999; Shi &
Liu, 2006). Reading models and empirical studies
have demonstrated that FL reading anxiety is
prevalent among FL learners. As the constructive
model of L2 reading (Bernhardt, 1990) indicates,
readers play an active role in constructing
meaning from the text and interact with texts
all the time; therefore, both reader characteristics
and the features of text exert influence on
reading a FL. Diverse features of a FL text, such
as unfamiliar orthography, graphemic–phonemic
decoding, syntactic and discourse features, and
cultural background, all tend to cause FL learners
difficulties in reading and thus cause FL reading
anxiety (Saito et al., 1999; Shi & Liu, 2006).
Unlike general FL anxiety, which is independent
of target languages, FL reading anxiety is found to
vary depending on the target language. For
instance, Saito et al. (1999) revealed that learners
of Japanese, Russian, and French experienced
different levels of FL reading anxiety.
We argue that FL reading anxiety might be a
salient problem to English-speaking learners of
Chinese as the two languages use different writing
systems that require different word recognition
skills (Perfetti & Liu, 2005; Smythe et al., 2008).
The different writing systems of Chinese and
English require different graphic, phonological,
and semantic processing activities in recognizing
words, as evidenced by Event Related Potentials
(ERP) studies and eye movement studies (Feng
et al., 2009; Perfetti & Liu, 2005; Smythe
et al., 2008). If English-speaking learners of
Chinese do not adapt their word decoding
process to the new language, this may lead to
ineffective construction of meaning from
the Chinese words. As word recognition is an
essential component of the L2 reading process
(Bernhardt, 1990), the inability to adjust to the
Chinese word decoding process might cause
difficulties for English-speaking learners reading
Chinese and thus might make anxiety a salient
psychological factor for them. Although FL
reading anxiety might be prevalent among
learners of Chinese as a foreign language, little
research on FL reading anxiety has been conducted in the population of English-speaking
learners of Chinese. The purpose of the present
study is to further examine the FL reading anxiety
of English-speaking students learning Chinese as
a FL and its correlates


