Coming from a city that is encircled by 5 volcanoes, I have experienced a time when one of the volcanoes had a big eruption. It caused a lot of damage to the people around the volcano, as villages were burned because of the lava, houses are damaged due to unable to bear the intensity of volcanic ashes on the roof, even a major bridge connecting my city to a major city melted down due to pyroclastic flows on the rivers. Those days were chaotic and the activities in the city were paralyzed for days until the volcano eruption stopped. After the eruption stopped, my school sent some people to help the victims with some basic needs such as foods clothes. As I read the article written by Judith Friedlander, it reminded me that we often feel the need of helping other people that are really in need. It is a noble thing, but have we ever thought about saving the animals and plants that also suffered from the disaster?
	As a place that is diverse in nationality and culture, Hong Kong is so dense in population. In fact, according to Hong Kong’s government statistics in 2019, the density of Hong Kong is estimated to be 6,872 population/km2. With such a high density of people, there are not a lot of places for animals and plants, including pollinators to live. Judith Friedlander, the writer of Bed and Breakfast for Birds and Bees, said that pollinators need a place to rest and eat in every 500 metres. In a high-density place like Hong Kong, it will be tough for them to find such places. These two scenarios show how easy it is for the pollinators, to lose their home due to natural disaster or the increase of human activity. If this keeps continuing, it is possible for us to lose those animals. 
	Those pollinators are part of our lives. In our daily basis, we see pollinators such as bees, birds, butterflies, etc. Other than acting as the beauty of our environment, they also provide our foods. The plants that produce foods for us only can grow because those pollinators help the reproduction of plants. As they eat drink the nectar from flowers, they also bring some pollens of that flower. This what helps the pollination of a flower, which later will grow into plant and bear fruits and vegetables for us. That’s why we can say that they are connected to us, or as Master Thich Nhat Hanh wrote in his commentary of the Heart Sutra, “inter-be” with nature. He described that “inter-be” as our body is full of everything but empty of a separate self. What he meant by this is that we can see that our body can only exist because and only because of everything in the universe exists. Simply said, losing the pollinators means that the ecosystem and environments might collapse, and humanity might be gone too . 
	Aware of those situations, why do not we do anything to prevent this from happening? It is because of our lack of understanding. Maybe some of you ask me “What do you mean that we lack understanding?”, well, I will explain. Lack of understanding here is related to the saying of Master Thich Nhat Hanh. In his commentary, he said that understanding will be born only if we only see the roots of our suffering . The truth is, these days, we suffered from fear; the fear of seeing that the civilization is dying; the fear that we felt as we see the pollution increases, the catastrophes happening around us. Because of that fear, we are afraid and feel powerless to make a change against that current, even though we are awake and aware of things that are happening . We can’t accept the fact that the civilization is going to die because of human’s ignorance and our greed, so we imagine that the end of our civilization as something as extreme and scary as the natural disaster pictured in 2009 film, 2012. By our greed, we butcher our forests-natural habitat for animals and plants, including the pollinators-, building more greenhouse that leads to the greenhouse effect of the earth, constructing more building. This is not to say that those kinds of things are bad, as this is also can be good to modernize the place that we are living on. However, if we don’t do anything to preserve our green spaces while doing that modernization, it will fasten the destruction of our civilization. Simply said, we suffer from fear because we feed the fear in our life and unable to release the chain that is caused by our own afflictions. 
	The only way that we can make a move is to understand. When asked about understanding, Master Confucius answered to understand others . In such a simple answer, there are more than it meets the eye. Here, we interpret it as understand others as understand about the earth. Master Thich Nhat Hanh said that Mother Earth doesn’t discriminate, in fact, she thinks that everything that exists in nature is perfect . It’s only in our mind that discriminate between good or bad. We can learn from Mother Earth that good and evil is just the matter of our judgement to things. Once we erase the judgement that we created for morality towards nature, we won’t afraid seeing that our civilization is facing the end of its era. We don’t need to worry about the Mother Earth, as if our civilization is ending, the Earth will just regenerate again. What we should worry about is about saving ourself first . If we can understand that the ending of civilization means the death of many, we are also saving ourself in the process and it helps us to be able to see the truth and have peace . 
You might be confused because of this statement, but I’ll simplify this. What will happen if we don’t understand this truth, is just we filled with fear all the time, becoming a baby turtle that doesn’t want to go to sea. It’ll just stay at the beach, doing nothing until the time it dies. It can only live if it goes to the sea and grows. This is related to the impermanence explained by Master Thich Nhat Hanh. He explained that everything happens because of impermanence, or something that he described as change. Without any change, there is nothing. We live, breath, and do our activities only because of the existence of that change. That’s why we should cherish the change and be able to accept the truth that change must happen, even though it might cost a lot for us. Because of the peace from understanding the truth, we can do things, as our effort to be a chance of saving civilization . 
	In this context, understand others could also mean that understanding the other living beings too. I have already explained that modernization might endanger our environment. But to understand the other living being, we have to understand them like we would understand a person. Master Thich Nhat Hanh said that if we want to understand a person, we have to enter deeply and become one with them . In other words, we have to feel their feelings, suffering and rejoice. You might be thinking, how can we, as a human, could become one with the animals, that live mostly based on their instinct, or even plants, that have no feeling? One thing that we can do to put ourself in their shoes. Imagine how is it feels to lose your home due to everything that’s happening. From imagining that, we can feel the suffering those living beings felt when we didn’t preserve their home. If we can really see the suffering and understand that they cannot do anything about it since they didn’t have the ability to change the situation, which we have, we will be reminded that we are responsible for everything that is happening, and compassion will be born in our heart .
 That compassion is what we call as humane. Being humane means that care those who suffer. When asked about humaneness, Master Confucius said, Love others . You might think that love others is easy, but to be honest, it is not easy. To love others means that you have to set aside your time and your energy to love yourself. However, if you could love others, if you could take a point that I’ve told said before, you could understand that loving other beings, such as flowers, trees, insects, birds, and many others, it means that you are loving yourself. As Master Confucius said “Being humane proceeds from you yourself” (Analects 12.1), we could infer that that compassion can only grow from us and we are the one that should spread that compassion to others too. It also means that compassion can only able to grow once we have already understood. Master Thich Nhat Hanh also said that other people can help us, but we ultimately have to be able to untie them by ourselves . By untying that knots, we can attain the freedom from the things that make us suffer, including fear. That’s why being humane also requires you to have the understanding, which I have already discussed before.
A lot of people now have gained this understanding, and they have started to act and implement their way to save the environment and civilization. One of the several people that have taken an action is Greta Thunberg. She promotes the awareness of climate change across the world, with her effort for doing the international school strike to prevent climate change. This kind of efforts requires participation from a lot of people. This kind of understanding only able to spread to others if you understand. Master Thich Nhat Hanh said that once we found understanding, we are able to transform our own suffering and touch peace, freedom and happiness, and also help others to be the same . This kind of activity also described by Master Confucius with the saying of “The virtue of the gentleman is like the wind; the virtue of the petty people like the grass. When the wind blows over the grass, surely it will bend” (Analects 12.19). If we know what is the suffering that we felt, and the current state of the world that we need to change, as long as we desire goodness, our good virtue will be spread amongst people. If we desire to love those pollinators, we can influence others to care about them too. 
I have the vision of Hong Kong B&B Highway because I have gained an understanding of the current situation, and with this speech, I spread it to you. This highway will be designed in a way so that those pollinators could have a place to rest in a very urbanised. It will be designed so that even though you are living in an apartment, you are still able to contribute to this project in your local community. You might reject my project maybe because allergic to insects, birds or plants, that’s completely fine. And if you reject my idea and think that is a stupid idea, that is completely fine for me, since everyone have their own opinion and I would love to hear your opinion on this. In working this project, I will try my best too to keep the order of our ritual, since harmony is only able to be achieved when we regulate the proceedings with the rituals . However, if you want to join my project, you will be very welcomed and I believe that the effort you do in this project will not go in vain, as it may help you grow as a person to be more empathic to other people and living beings around us; having a chance to save our dying civilization. 
In conclusion, I do this project only because of the concern of civilization, and it requires an understanding of the current state of our earth. By understanding that, we are able to be freed from the afflictions that hinder us from doing things, and at the same time help us to love those pollinators as our efforts to save this civilization. If you have any question, you can let me know. It will be great if you have an idea for this project too. Thank you for listening to my project proposal and its purpose. 
